----
title: "Heart Disease Detection Tool: An ML-Based Approach"
excerpt: "Comparative Analysis of Machine Learning Models for Heart Disease Prediction: A Web Application | Team Size: 1 |  Role: Sole Developer | Advisor: Mr. Madhusundaran"
collection: projects 
----
Heart disease remains a leading cause of mortality worldwide, presenting significant challenges for accurate prediction by medical professionals. This study aims to develop an automated diagnostic system to enhance medical efficiency and reduce costs associated with heart disease prediction. Employing data mining techniques and machine learning, we sought to uncover hidden patterns in health parameters and predict heart disease risk on a quantifiable scale. The Cleveland heart disease dataset from the University of California Irvine (UCI) machine learning repository served as the basis for evaluating various models. Six machine learning models—K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Naive Bayes, Recursive Partitioning (rpart), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM) with linear kernel, and SVM with radial kernel—were compared using R programming. The models were assessed based on their accuracy and kappa values. The RF model demonstrated the highest performance, achieving superior accuracy and reliability. Furthermore, we developed a web application interface using R Shiny, enabling easy user interaction with the predictive model with an accuracy of 60.25%. This research contributes to more timely and accurate diagnoses of heart disease through the application of advanced computational methods, offering a practical tool for medical professionals and enhancing overall diagnostic efficiency.

[Download paper](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19r3vFpL5jwnfS32H4lor7CZkKdfcNI6GaP98HQFJYQ4/edit?usp=sharing)
